Add release notes for 8.9.0 release (#97061)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/release-notes/highlights.asciidoc

| {ref-bare}/8.1/release-highlights.html[8.1]
| {ref-bare}/8.0/release-highlights.html[8.0]

endif::[]

// tag::notable-highlights[]

[discrete]
[[better_indexing_search_performance_under_concurrent_indexing_search]]
=== Better indexing and search performance under concurrent indexing and search

> When a query like a match phrase query or a terms query targets a constant keyword field we can skipquery execution on shards where the query is rewritten to match no documents. We take advantage of index mappingsincluding constant keyword fields and rewrite queries in such a way that, if a constant keyword field does notmatch the value defined in the index mapping, we rewrite the query to match no document. This will result in theshard level request to return immediately, before the query is executed on the data node and, as a result, skippingthe shard completely. Here we leverage the ability to skip shards whenever possible to avoid unnecessary shardrefreshes and improve query latency (by not doing any search-related I/O). Avoiding such unnecessary shard refreshesimproves query latency since the search thread does not need to wait anymore for unnecessary shard refreshes. Shardsnot matching the query criteria will remain in a search-idle state and indexing throughput will not be negativelyaffected by a refresh. Before introducing this change a query hitting multiple shards, including those with nodocuments matching the search criteria (think about using index patterns or data streams with many backing indices),would potentially result in a "shard refresh storm" increasing query latency as a result of the search threadwaiting on all shard refreshes to complete before being able to initiate and carry out the search operation.After introducing this change the search thread will just need to wait for refreshes to be completed on shardsincluding relevant data. Note that execution of the shard pre-filter and the corresponding "can match" phase whererewriting happens, depends on the overall number of shards involved and on whether there is at least one of themreturning a non-empty result (see 'pre_filter_shard_size' setting to understand how to control this behaviour).Elasticsearch does the rewrite operation on the data node in the so called "can match" phase, taking advantage ofthe fact that, at that moment, we can access index mappings and extract information about constant keyword fieldsand their values. This means we still"fan-out" search queries from the coordinator node to involved data nodes.Rewriting queries based on index mappings is not possible on the coordinator node because the coordinator node ismissing index mapping information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a query like a match phrase query or a terms query targets a constant keyword field we can skip query execution on shards where the query is rewritten to match no documents. We take advantage of index mappings including constant keyword fields and rewrite queries in such a way that, if a constant keyword field does not match the value defined in the index mapping, we rewrite the query to match no document. This will result in the shard level request to return immediately, before the query is executed on the data node and, as a result, skipping the shard completely. Here we leverage the ability to skip shards whenever possible to avoid unnecessary shard refreshes and improve query latency (by not doing any search-related I/O). Avoiding such unnecessary shard refreshes improves query latency since the search thread does not need to wait anymore for unnecessary shard refreshes. Shards not matching the query criteria will remain in a search-idle state and indexing throughput will not be negatively affected by a refresh. Before introducing this change a query hitting multiple shards, including those with no documents matching the search criteria (think about using index patterns or data streams with many backing indices), would potentially result in a "shard refresh storm" increasing query latency as a result of the search thread waiting on all shard refreshes to complete before being able to initiate and carry out the search operation. After introducing this change the search thread will just need to wait for refreshes to be completed on shards including relevant data. Note that execution of the shard pre-filter and the corresponding "can match" phase where rewriting happens, depends on the overall number of shards involved and on whether there is at least one of them returning a non-empty result (see 'pre_filter_shard_size' setting to understand how to control this behavior). Elasticsearch does the rewrite operation on the data node in the so called "can match" phase, taking advantage of the fact that, at that moment, we can access index mappings and extract information about constant keyword fields and their values. This means we still "fan-out" search queries from the coordinator node to involved data nodes. Rewriting queries based on index mappings is not possible on the coordinator node because the coordinator node is missing index mapping information.
```
